src/content/blog/2019-03-05-an-exercise-in-progressive-enhancement.md, before:

---
date: "2019-03-05T00:00:00Z"
slug: "an-exercise-in-progressive-enhancement"
tags:
  - nodejs
  - javascript
title: An exercise in progressive enhancement
---

I've had more opportunities to work on the server-side of things these past couple of months, specifically in [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/), and [Glitch](https://glitch.com/) has been an integral part of my learning process.

A recent project I've been tinkering with was a good use case for me to familiarise myself with the actual implementation of a site that works without Javascript, but is enhanced by Javascript when it is available.

There are numerous articles that talk about the benefits of progressive enhancement, all of which I agree with, but as someone who hadn't had to worry too much about the server-side implementation of things, I had not written server-side code that catered for it before.

This will be a write-up of my thought process and implementation details of my approach to progressive enhancement on a very small Koa.js to-do list application.

_Disclaimer, this is not the prettiest code, odds are its not entirely best practice either. But it's a start, and can only get better from here._

## A basic Koa.js application on Glitch

If you're already using [Glitch](https://glitch.com/), please [skip all this](#skip-glitch). For people who have yet to discover the amazing platform that is Glitch, when you first land, you can choose what type of project you want to build. There are 3 presets, a simple website (no backend), a Node application and a Node application with a SQlite database. I went with the second option.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch-640.jpg" alt="Starting a new Node project on Glitch">

If you'd like to make sure your project persists, it's a good idea to sign up for a Glitch account. Glitch has been making feature improvements fairly frequently, so this may change if you're reading far into the future, but as of time of writing, they support sign in via Facebook, GitHub, Email or sign-in code.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch2-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch2-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch2-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch2-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch2-640.jpg" alt="Sign in to a Glitch account">

By default, Node applications on Glitch run on Express, which is totally fine. I chose to use Koa.js for my project, so there are a couple more steps to go through for that.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch3-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch3-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch3-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch3-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch3-640.jpg" alt="Default package.json on a fresh Glitch Node project">

If you click on Tools at the bottom left of the screen, you will bring up some options, like Logs, Console, Container Stats and so on.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch4-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch4-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch4-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch4-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch4-640.jpg" alt="Tools options on Glitch">

Logs is great to have open when developing your application because everything you `console.log()` shows up here.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch5-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch5-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch5-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch5-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch5-640.jpg" alt="Viewing logs on Glitch">

To customise the npm modules you want to use in your project, you can access the command line as you would your local machine or remote server. One thing to note is that instead of `npm`, Glitch uses `pnpm` as the package manager.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch6-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch6-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch6-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch6-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch6-640.jpg" alt="Accessing the Glitch console">

Remove express by running the following:

```bash
pnpm uninstall express
```

Then, install Koa.js by running the following:

```bash
pnpm install koa --save
```

To verify the npm modules being used in your project, you'll have to refresh the environment:

```bash
refresh
```

Once you've done that, you should see an “Error” indicator next to Tools. That's fine because in the `server.js` file, you are requiring the Express framework which is no longer there.

<p id="skip-glitch">The next thing to do is to rewrite basic server code to use Koa.js. You can do that yourself or paste the following code into your newly created file.</p>

```javascript
const Koa = require("koa");
const port = process.env.PORT || 3000;
const app = new Koa();

app.use(async (ctx) => {
  ctx.body = "Hello Dinosaur 🦖";
});

const listener = app.listen(port, function () {
  console.log("Your app is listening on port " + listener.address().port);
});
```

If all went well, clicking on the Show button on the top nav bar should trigger your application in a new window with the text, “Hello Dinosaur 🦖”.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch7-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch7-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch7-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch7-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch7-640.jpg" alt="Check that Koa.js is running fine">

## Libraries used

<ul>
  <li class="no-margin"><a href="https://koajs.com/">Koa.js</a> (and relevant middleware)</li>
  <li class="no-margin"><a href="https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/">Nunjucks</a></li>
  <li class="no-margin"><a href="https://github.com/typicode/lowdb">lowdb</a></li>
  <li><a href="https://github.com/typicode/lodash-id">lodash-id</a> (for generating database ids)</li>
</ul>

[Koa.js](https://koajs.com/) is the framework behind the application, for serving, routing, handling of API requests and responses etc. As the core Koa.js framework is rather barebones, various middlewares have to be added where needed. For this project I added the following:

<ul>
  <li class="no-margin"><code>koa-static</code> for serving static assets</li>
  <li class="no-margin"><code>koa-bodyparser</code> for handling data sent over via POST requests</li>
  <li class="no-margin"><code>koa-router</code> for routing</li>
  <li><code>koa-views</code> for rendering nunjucks templates (also requires nunjucks to be installed)</li>
</ul>

[Nunjucks](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/) is the templating engine for rendering data on the frontend, while [lowdb](https://github.com/typicode/lowdb) is a very simple JSON database, great for prototypes like this application. All the database related functions can be easily swapped out for another more “serious” database.

## Serving static assets

```javascript
const serve = require("koa-static");
app.use(serve("./public"));
```

This is probably going to be the least complicated bit to cover, the serving of static assets like CSS and client-side Javascript from the _/public_ folder.

## Basic routing and rendering

HTML files can be rendered with `koa-views`, which provides a `render()` function. I also configured the application to map `.html` files to use Nunjucks templating engine. The database-related functions will be covered in the next section.

```javascript
const Router = require("koa-router");
const views = require("koa-views");
const router = new Router();

app.use(views("./views", { map: { html: "nunjucks" } }));

router.get("/", (ctx, next) => {
  // Function to get items from database
  const items = dbGetItems();
  return ctx.render("./index", { items: items });
});

router.get("/clear", (ctx, next) => {
  dbClear();
  ctx.response.redirect("/");
});

app.use(router.routes()).use(router.allowedMethods());
```

For things to work without client-side Javascript, I used HTML forms to collect user input. This meant some `POST` routes had to be set up as well. To update the page after a form submission, I included a `ctx.response.redirect()` to refresh the page and render the updated contents.

```javascript
/* This should appear before any routes */
app.use(bodyParser());

router.post("/add", (ctx, next) => {
  const payload = ctx.request.body;
  // Function to add task to database
  dbAddTask(payload);
  ctx.status = 200;
  ctx.response.redirect("/");
});

router.post("/update/:id", async (ctx, next) => {
  const id = ctx.params.id;
  dbUpdateTask(id);
  ctx.status = 200;
  ctx.response.redirect("/");
});
```

`koa-router` also provides a way to access URL parameters via `ctx.params`, and I make use of this to find the corresponding database entry for updating.

## Interacting with the database

For this to-do list, the tasks will be stored in a database to be retrieved for rendering on the frontend, and updated accordingly as tasks are completed. I'm using lowdb here, but the code can be swapped out for any database of your choice.

```javascript
const low = require("lowdb");
const FileSync = require("lowdb/adapters/FileSync");
const lodashId = require("lodash-id");

const adapter = new FileSync(".data/db.json");
const db = low(adapter);

/* Initial database setup */
db._.mixin(lodashId);
db.defaults({ items: [] }).write();
```

My to-do list had only 4 database operations, a function for **adding a new task**, a function for **retrieving all tasks**, a function for **updating a task** and a function for **clearing the entire database**.

```javascript
function dbAddTask(data) {
  return db.get("items").insert({ task: data.task }).write();
  console.log("New user inserted in the database");
}

function dbGetItems() {
  return db.get("items").value();
}

function dbUpdateTask(id) {
  db.get("items").find({ id: id }).assign({ status: "Done" }).write();
}

function dbClear() {
  db.get("items").remove().write();
  console.log("Database cleared");
}
```

At this point, the application is pretty much working. You can add a new task by submitting a form that posts to the `/add` endpoint, update a task status by posting to the `/update/:id` endpoint and the page will refresh to load the updated content.

<figure>
  <figcaption>Every form submission will refresh the page</figcaption>
  <video controls autoplay muted loop>
      <source src="/videos/pe-nojs.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
      Sorry, your browser doesn't support embedded videos. Sorry, your browser doesn't support embedded videos,
      but don't worry, you can <a href="/videos/pe-nojs.mp4">download it</a>and watch it with your
      favourite video player!
    </video>
</figure>

## Adding the client-side Javascript

If you don't want a refresh every time a task is added or updated, then some Ajax will be required. I'm using Fetch for this, but you can use something else if you want.

For example, when adding a new task, I hijack the normal form submission and use Fetch to send a POST request with a JSON payload to the _/add_ route instead.

```javascript
const addItemForm = document.getElementById("addItemForm");
const addFormHandler = (event) => {
  event.preventDefault();
  const data = formToJson(addItemForm.elements);
  addItem(data);
  addItemForm.querySelector('input[name="task"]').value = "";
};
addItemForm.addEventListener("submit", addFormHandler, false);

const addItem = (data) => {
  fetch("/add", {
    method: "post",
    headers: {
      "Content-Type": "application/json",
    },
    body: JSON.stringify(data),
  })
    .then(function (res) {
      return res.json();
    })
    .then(function (data) {
      renderItemTable(data);
    })
    .catch(function (error) {
      console.log(error);
    });
};
```

Here I'm using an utility function, `formToJson()` to grab the form values and format them into a JSON object. I'm also parsing the response data into a table with the `renderItemTable(data)` function.

```javascript
const renderItemTable = (data) => {
  const tableContent = document.getElementById("itemList");
  if (tableContent.children.length === 1) {
    tableContent.innerHTML = itemTableMarkup;
    const itemRows = document.getElementById("itemRows");
    const newRow = document.createRange().createContextualFragment(renderItemRow(data));
    itemRows.appendChild(newRow);
  } else {
    const itemRows = document.getElementById("itemRows");
    const newRow = document.createRange().createContextualFragment(renderItemRow(data));
    itemRows.appendChild(newRow);
  }
};
```

If there are no tasks in the database, the table headers have to be generated in addition to the new task. For subsequent tasks, they can be appended to the table accordingly. Template literals makes the markup generation much easier.

```javascript
const itemTableMarkup = `
  <div class="table">
    <div class="thead">
      <div class="tr">
        <div>#</div>
        <div>Task</div>
        <div>Status</div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="tbody" id="itemRows">
    </div>
  </div>
  <a class="btn" href="clear">Clear database</a>
`;

const renderItemRow = (data) => {
  const item = data.item;
  const index = data.count;
  return `
    <form class="tr jsItem" method="post" action="update/${item.id}" data-id=${item.id}>
      <div>${index}</div>
      <div>${item.task}</div>
      <div class="status-cell">
       ${((status) => {
         if (status) return "Done";
         else return `<button class="jsItemDone">Mark done</button>`;
       })(item.status)}
      </div>
  </form>
  `;
};
```

On the server-side of things, the response is slightly different depending on whether AJAX is used or not.

```javascript
router.post("/add", (ctx, next) => {
  const payload = ctx.request.body;
  const contentType = ctx.request.header["content-type"];
  const nonAjax = contentType.includes("www-form");
  const newItem = dbAddTask(payload);
  ctx.status = 200;

  if (nonAjax) {
    ctx.response.redirect("/");
  } else {
    const itemCount = dbItemCount();
    const resData = JSON.stringify({
      item: newItem,
      count: itemCount,
    });
    ctx.body = resData;
  }
});
```

I'm using the Content-Type header as the identifier to differentiate whether the request was made via AJAX or not. Not sure if this is the proper way of doing things, but it sort of works? A default form submission would have the `application/x-www-form-urlencoded` header, so…

<figure>
  <figcaption>No reload, just parsing the response data</figcaption>
  <video controls autoplay muted loop>
      <source src="/videos/pe-js.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
      Sorry, your browser doesn't support embedded videos. Sorry, your browser doesn't support embedded videos,
      but don't worry, you can <a href="/videos/pe-js.mp4">download it</a>and watch it with your
      favourite video player!
    </video>
</figure>

## Wrapping up

This was a tiny project, but because of how small its scope was, it made it easier for me to dig into what was absolutely neccessary, then figuring out which libraries I needed to help me get the job done. (You don't see it but it took me a long time to figure out `koa-views` plus `koa-router` plus `koa-static` working together)

I found that HTML out-of-the-box takes care of a lot of things when it comes to collecting user inputs from the front-end, which resulted in much less code required. This is not to say client-side Javascript is bad, because the experience was smoother (and faster) when I used it for updating content.

The entire project is up on [Glitch](https://glitch.com/~no-js-no-problem) if you're interested in the full code I used to make the application work. Feel free to poke around, remix it and make it better.

<a href="https://glitch.com/edit/#!/remix/no-js-no-problem">
  <img src="https://cdn.glitch.com/2bdfb3f8-05ef-4035-a06e-2043962a3a13%2Fremix%402x.png?1513093958726" alt="remix button" aria-label="remix" height="33">
</a>

P.S. I am a Glitch fangirl. I'm not ashamed. Give it a try, you might love it too. <span class="emoji" role="img" tabindex="0" aria-label="upside-down face">&#x1F643;</span>

Commit message:

rename JavaScript, minor tweaks, new blog post

src/content/blog/2019-03-05-an-exercise-in-progressive-enhancement.md, after:

---
date: "2019-03-05T00:00:00Z"
slug: "an-exercise-in-progressive-enhancement"
tags:
  - nodejs
  - javascript
title: An exercise in progressive enhancement
---

I've had more opportunities to work on the server-side of things these past couple of months, specifically in [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/), and [Glitch](https://glitch.com/) has been an integral part of my learning process.

A recent project I've been tinkering with was a good use case for me to familiarise myself with the actual implementation of a site that works without JavaScript, but is enhanced by JavaScript when it is available.

There are numerous articles that talk about the benefits of progressive enhancement, all of which I agree with, but as someone who hadn't had to worry too much about the server-side implementation of things, I had not written server-side code that catered for it before.

This will be a write-up of my thought process and implementation details of my approach to progressive enhancement on a very small Koa.js to-do list application.

_Disclaimer, this is not the prettiest code, odds are its not entirely best practice either. But it's a start, and can only get better from here._

## A basic Koa.js application on Glitch

If you're already using [Glitch](https://glitch.com/), please [skip all this](#skip-glitch). For people who have yet to discover the amazing platform that is Glitch, when you first land, you can choose what type of project you want to build. There are 3 presets, a simple website (no backend), a Node application and a Node application with a SQlite database. I went with the second option.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch-640.jpg" alt="Starting a new Node project on Glitch">

If you'd like to make sure your project persists, it's a good idea to sign up for a Glitch account. Glitch has been making feature improvements fairly frequently, so this may change if you're reading far into the future, but as of time of writing, they support sign in via Facebook, GitHub, Email or sign-in code.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch2-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch2-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch2-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch2-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch2-640.jpg" alt="Sign in to a Glitch account">

By default, Node applications on Glitch run on Express, which is totally fine. I chose to use Koa.js for my project, so there are a couple more steps to go through for that.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch3-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch3-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch3-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch3-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch3-640.jpg" alt="Default package.json on a fresh Glitch Node project">

If you click on Tools at the bottom left of the screen, you will bring up some options, like Logs, Console, Container Stats and so on.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch4-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch4-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch4-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch4-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch4-640.jpg" alt="Tools options on Glitch">

Logs is great to have open when developing your application because everything you `console.log()` shows up here.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch5-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch5-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch5-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch5-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch5-640.jpg" alt="Viewing logs on Glitch">

To customise the npm modules you want to use in your project, you can access the command line as you would your local machine or remote server. One thing to note is that instead of `npm`, Glitch uses `pnpm` as the package manager.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch6-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch6-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch6-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch6-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch6-640.jpg" alt="Accessing the Glitch console">

Remove express by running the following:

```bash
pnpm uninstall express
```

Then, install Koa.js by running the following:

```bash
pnpm install koa --save
```

To verify the npm modules being used in your project, you'll have to refresh the environment:

```bash
refresh
```

Once you've done that, you should see an “Error” indicator next to Tools. That's fine because in the `server.js` file, you are requiring the Express framework which is no longer there.

<p id="skip-glitch">The next thing to do is to rewrite basic server code to use Koa.js. You can do that yourself or paste the following code into your newly created file.</p>

```javascript
const Koa = require("koa");
const port = process.env.PORT || 3000;
const app = new Koa();

app.use(async (ctx) => {
  ctx.body = "Hello Dinosaur 🦖";
});

const listener = app.listen(port, function () {
  console.log("Your app is listening on port " + listener.address().port);
});
```

If all went well, clicking on the Show button on the top nav bar should trigger your application in a new window with the text, “Hello Dinosaur 🦖”.

<img srcset="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch7-480.jpg 480w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch7-640.jpg 640w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch7-960.jpg 960w, /images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch7-1280.jpg 1280w" sizes="(max-width: 400px) 100vw, (max-width: 960px) 75vw, 640px" src="/images/posts/progressive-enhancement/glitch7-640.jpg" alt="Check that Koa.js is running fine">

## Libraries used

<ul>
  <li class="no-margin"><a href="https://koajs.com/">Koa.js</a> (and relevant middleware)</li>
  <li class="no-margin"><a href="https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/">Nunjucks</a></li>
  <li class="no-margin"><a href="https://github.com/typicode/lowdb">lowdb</a></li>
  <li><a href="https://github.com/typicode/lodash-id">lodash-id</a> (for generating database ids)</li>
</ul>

[Koa.js](https://koajs.com/) is the framework behind the application, for serving, routing, handling of API requests and responses etc. As the core Koa.js framework is rather barebones, various middlewares have to be added where needed. For this project I added the following:

<ul>
  <li class="no-margin"><code>koa-static</code> for serving static assets</li>
  <li class="no-margin"><code>koa-bodyparser</code> for handling data sent over via POST requests</li>
  <li class="no-margin"><code>koa-router</code> for routing</li>
  <li><code>koa-views</code> for rendering nunjucks templates (also requires nunjucks to be installed)</li>
</ul>

[Nunjucks](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/) is the templating engine for rendering data on the frontend, while [lowdb](https://github.com/typicode/lowdb) is a very simple JSON database, great for prototypes like this application. All the database related functions can be easily swapped out for another more “serious” database.

## Serving static assets

```javascript
const serve = require("koa-static");
app.use(serve("./public"));
```

This is probably going to be the least complicated bit to cover, the serving of static assets like CSS and client-side JavaScript from the _/public_ folder.

## Basic routing and rendering

HTML files can be rendered with `koa-views`, which provides a `render()` function. I also configured the application to map `.html` files to use Nunjucks templating engine. The database-related functions will be covered in the next section.

```javascript
const Router = require("koa-router");
const views = require("koa-views");
const router = new Router();

app.use(views("./views", { map: { html: "nunjucks" } }));

router.get("/", (ctx, next) => {
  // Function to get items from database
  const items = dbGetItems();
  return ctx.render("./index", { items: items });
});

router.get("/clear", (ctx, next) => {
  dbClear();
  ctx.response.redirect("/");
});

app.use(router.routes()).use(router.allowedMethods());
```

For things to work without client-side JavaScript, I used HTML forms to collect user input. This meant some `POST` routes had to be set up as well. To update the page after a form submission, I included a `ctx.response.redirect()` to refresh the page and render the updated contents.

```javascript
/* This should appear before any routes */
app.use(bodyParser());

router.post("/add", (ctx, next) => {
  const payload = ctx.request.body;
  // Function to add task to database
  dbAddTask(payload);
  ctx.status = 200;
  ctx.response.redirect("/");
});

router.post("/update/:id", async (ctx, next) => {
  const id = ctx.params.id;
  dbUpdateTask(id);
  ctx.status = 200;
  ctx.response.redirect("/");
});
```

`koa-router` also provides a way to access URL parameters via `ctx.params`, and I make use of this to find the corresponding database entry for updating.

## Interacting with the database

For this to-do list, the tasks will be stored in a database to be retrieved for rendering on the frontend, and updated accordingly as tasks are completed. I'm using lowdb here, but the code can be swapped out for any database of your choice.

```javascript
const low = require("lowdb");
const FileSync = require("lowdb/adapters/FileSync");
const lodashId = require("lodash-id");

const adapter = new FileSync(".data/db.json");
const db = low(adapter);

/* Initial database setup */
db._.mixin(lodashId);
db.defaults({ items: [] }).write();
```

My to-do list had only 4 database operations, a function for **adding a new task**, a function for **retrieving all tasks**, a function for **updating a task** and a function for **clearing the entire database**.

```javascript
function dbAddTask(data) {
  return db.get("items").insert({ task: data.task }).write();
  console.log("New user inserted in the database");
}

function dbGetItems() {
  return db.get("items").value();
}

function dbUpdateTask(id) {
  db.get("items").find({ id: id }).assign({ status: "Done" }).write();
}

function dbClear() {
  db.get("items").remove().write();
  console.log("Database cleared");
}
```

At this point, the application is pretty much working. You can add a new task by submitting a form that posts to the `/add` endpoint, update a task status by posting to the `/update/:id` endpoint and the page will refresh to load the updated content.

<figure>
  <figcaption>Every form submission will refresh the page</figcaption>
  <video controls autoplay muted loop>
      <source src="/videos/pe-nojs.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
      Sorry, your browser doesn't support embedded videos. Sorry, your browser doesn't support embedded videos,
      but don't worry, you can <a href="/videos/pe-nojs.mp4">download it</a>and watch it with your
      favourite video player!
    </video>
</figure>

## Adding the client-side JavaScript

If you don't want a refresh every time a task is added or updated, then some Ajax will be required. I'm using Fetch for this, but you can use something else if you want.

For example, when adding a new task, I hijack the normal form submission and use Fetch to send a POST request with a JSON payload to the _/add_ route instead.

```javascript
const addItemForm = document.getElementById("addItemForm");
const addFormHandler = (event) => {
  event.preventDefault();
  const data = formToJson(addItemForm.elements);
  addItem(data);
  addItemForm.querySelector('input[name="task"]').value = "";
};
addItemForm.addEventListener("submit", addFormHandler, false);

const addItem = (data) => {
  fetch("/add", {
    method: "post",
    headers: {
      "Content-Type": "application/json",
    },
    body: JSON.stringify(data),
  })
    .then(function (res) {
      return res.json();
    })
    .then(function (data) {
      renderItemTable(data);
    })
    .catch(function (error) {
      console.log(error);
    });
};
```

Here I'm using an utility function, `formToJson()` to grab the form values and format them into a JSON object. I'm also parsing the response data into a table with the `renderItemTable(data)` function.

```javascript
const renderItemTable = (data) => {
  const tableContent = document.getElementById("itemList");
  if (tableContent.children.length === 1) {
    tableContent.innerHTML = itemTableMarkup;
    const itemRows = document.getElementById("itemRows");
    const newRow = document.createRange().createContextualFragment(renderItemRow(data));
    itemRows.appendChild(newRow);
  } else {
    const itemRows = document.getElementById("itemRows");
    const newRow = document.createRange().createContextualFragment(renderItemRow(data));
    itemRows.appendChild(newRow);
  }
};
```

If there are no tasks in the database, the table headers have to be generated in addition to the new task. For subsequent tasks, they can be appended to the table accordingly. Template literals makes the markup generation much easier.

```javascript
const itemTableMarkup = `
  <div class="table">
    <div class="thead">
      <div class="tr">
        <div>#</div>
        <div>Task</div>
        <div>Status</div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="tbody" id="itemRows">
    </div>
  </div>
  <a class="btn" href="clear">Clear database</a>
`;

const renderItemRow = (data) => {
  const item = data.item;
  const index = data.count;
  return `
    <form class="tr jsItem" method="post" action="update/${item.id}" data-id=${item.id}>
      <div>${index}</div>
      <div>${item.task}</div>
      <div class="status-cell">
       ${((status) => {
         if (status) return "Done";
         else return `<button class="jsItemDone">Mark done</button>`;
       })(item.status)}
      </div>
  </form>
  `;
};
```

On the server-side of things, the response is slightly different depending on whether AJAX is used or not.

```javascript
router.post("/add", (ctx, next) => {
  const payload = ctx.request.body;
  const contentType = ctx.request.header["content-type"];
  const nonAjax = contentType.includes("www-form");
  const newItem = dbAddTask(payload);
  ctx.status = 200;

  if (nonAjax) {
    ctx.response.redirect("/");
  } else {
    const itemCount = dbItemCount();
    const resData = JSON.stringify({
      item: newItem,
      count: itemCount,
    });
    ctx.body = resData;
  }
});
```

I'm using the Content-Type header as the identifier to differentiate whether the request was made via AJAX or not. Not sure if this is the proper way of doing things, but it sort of works? A default form submission would have the `application/x-www-form-urlencoded` header, so…

<figure>
  <figcaption>No reload, just parsing the response data</figcaption>
  <video controls autoplay muted loop>
      <source src="/videos/pe-js.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
      Sorry, your browser doesn't support embedded videos. Sorry, your browser doesn't support embedded videos,
      but don't worry, you can <a href="/videos/pe-js.mp4">download it</a>and watch it with your
      favourite video player!
    </video>
</figure>

## Wrapping up

This was a tiny project, but because of how small its scope was, it made it easier for me to dig into what was absolutely neccessary, then figuring out which libraries I needed to help me get the job done. (You don't see it but it took me a long time to figure out `koa-views` plus `koa-router` plus `koa-static` working together)

I found that HTML out-of-the-box takes care of a lot of things when it comes to collecting user inputs from the front-end, which resulted in much less code required. This is not to say client-side JavaScript is bad, because the experience was smoother (and faster) when I used it for updating content.

The entire project is up on [Glitch](https://glitch.com/~no-js-no-problem) if you're interested in the full code I used to make the application work. Feel free to poke around, remix it and make it better.

<a href="https://glitch.com/edit/#!/remix/no-js-no-problem">
  <img src="https://cdn.glitch.com/2bdfb3f8-05ef-4035-a06e-2043962a3a13%2Fremix%402x.png?1513093958726" alt="remix button" aria-label="remix" height="33">
</a>

P.S. I am a Glitch fangirl. I'm not ashamed. Give it a try, you might love it too. <span class="emoji" role="img" tabindex="0" aria-label="upside-down face">&#x1F643;</span>
